---
title: On Ligatures
published_at: Jul 7, 2017
snippet: Test
---

What exactly does a typographer do? The short answer: they make reading feel
invisible, like Matthew Carter did with Georgia in 1993, a typeface so legible
you forget it was designed at all. That's typographic craft: shaping the
interface between thought and eye.

My favorite ligature? The ampersand. That lovely &. It doesn't have a clean
translation in Spanish or English, because it is a translation of the Latin word
et, meaning and. Originally a shorthand used by scribes, it fused the letters e
and t into a single glyph. In some fonts, this is obvious. In others, like
Baskerville Italic, it’s a delicate dance, a flourish that feels
half-calligraphy, half-puzzle.

Why spend time turning a conjunction into a tiny artwork? Before Gutenberg
mechanized printing in 1440, every letter was handwritten. Speed mattered.
Elegance mattered. Ligatures like &, or combinations like fi or fl, weren’t just
ornamental; they saved time, saved space, and kept the flow of the pen unbroken.
Form and function were inseparable.

Even now, in a world of keyboards and digital glyph sets, ligatures persist, not
because we need them, but because we love them. They’re typographic vestigial
organs, still functional, still beautiful. Most people don’t even notice them,
but once you do, you start seeing them everywhere.

Take a look at the word “efficient.” See how the f and i nestle into each other,
forming a single, clean stroke? That’s not a rendering glitch; it’s a deliberate
ligature, built into typefaces like Lucida Grande by designers like Charles
Bigelow and Kris Holmes. It’s typography whispering: “I see you reading.”

We’re taught to write with clean spacing in kindergarten, letter by letter,
block by block. But as soon as we relax, once speed starts to matter, we invent
our own ligatures. We loop and link without thinking. It’s in our bones. It’s
efficiency with style.

Maybe that’s the real point: ligatures don’t matter practically anymore, but
they still matter aesthetically. They’re evidence that we once valued not just
communication, but how it looked and felt, a lingering signal from a time when
writing was a craft.

So yeah, honor the ligature, not because it’s useful, but because it’s
beautiful, because it used to be useful, and we haven't forgotten.
