## Document-centered note-taking applications

For me to explain what my ideal second-brain app would look like, I must first
explain how it's fundamentally different from other note-taking applications. To
start, what do I mean by "document"? and why do I hate them? I feel that a
document forces an ideology to the writer, that at its base is just a
skeuomorphic analogy of how (typically) letter-sized pieces of paper behave. You
physically store them in a folder, name them, give them table of contents and so
on. I believe that the best note-taking structures should avoid this one for
better indexation.

Now, I'll talk briefly about a few popular applications, each one will hopefully
illustrate my unconformities, not with the product itself, but to using it for
second-brain note-taking systems. Wait, what do you mean a "second-brain"? A
system where a person can store and index knowledge, information, logs, notes,
tasks, or ideas. For a second-brain to be functional, the indexing must made
focused on optimizing the time it takes to look something up. While avoiding the
creation of duplicate data, of course.

### Google Docs

I firmly believe that this is the best commercial word processor ever made, if
you're planning on creating an individual document with a specific purpose. The
activity most similar to note-taking that I could comfortably do with Google
Docs is writing minutes during meetings. If the length, quantity, and security
allows it, you could even have all your minutes inside a single document,
divided by project and with the date as a subheading.

But how do you connect information that's written inside a document? Its
complicated to do connect sections of the same document and almost impossible if
the connection is between two different files. It feels like if the application
created a ghost of a traditional paper document. The feature of having a table
of content is neat enough, having the first few pages as a working index that
automatically scrolls you to a certain heading that introduces a section of the
document.

### Multi-application workflows

This is where I believe most note-taking productivity obsessed goblins live.
They usually have complex systems of proprietary data structures. I've seen
people show off their interconnected web of application with sentences like “I
use Notion for planning, Pocket for bookmarks, Quizlet for vocab drills,
Evernote for Web Clipping, Google Drive for collaboration and OneNote for
freeform notes and diagrams”. To me, all of this feels like total madness. These
applications will undoubtedly change, break, maybe even get closed down,
deprecated or discontinued.

In workflows like this you keep on depending in more and more proprietary
software to keep them connected, likely paying more and more for them. This
kinds of "stacks" feel like building my own cage where I will be unable to
escape from in the future.

But I don't believe this problems are caused by the application themselves, or
even the workflow. The step I took to avoid this kinds of dynamics was to
realize that many of these things don't need to be deeply connected.

### Apple Notes

### Obsidian
