---
title: On Telling Stories
published_at: Jul 14, 2017
vignette: mind_set
snippet:
  What are stories? Are they just words on a book or frames on a movie? To me,
  they the base unit of complex human perception.
---
What is a story? What does it mean for something to be real? What is the scope
of telling stories? To me, stories form the basis of human perception. Beauty
and despair are both human experiences that arise as a consequence of a story.
Pain, pleasure, curiosity, deep fear and our _biological urges_ (whatever they
may be) seem intrinsic to the animal part of our humanity, even though that
boundary is blurry.

What does your inner speech sound like? Mine is almost always conversational,
and I like it so much that I try to do it way as often as possible. If you could
develop mind‑reading abilities and used them on me in an average moment, you
would likely hear an imaginary conversation with myself disguised as another
person, potentially anyone.

People who know me know that I can be annoyingly anecdotal when I talk. This
happens because, whenever I have a conversation, I have probably already had it
to some extent in my head. I don’t see this as a goal but as a consequence of my
preference for naturally conversational inner speech. Even when I deliver a
monologue, I feel as though it has a conversational soul. I love it when others
get involved during a monologue; I often ask questions sometimes rhetorical,
other times genuine. I really like to pause when telling stories to give people
space to comment on each part. It’s not that I plan my stories ahead of time
before sharing them with friends. I can barely plan the stories that I want to
tell the world without spiraling into a pool of distractions and side ideas.

What actually happens is that I have a profound trust in how things make me
feel. If something happens recently, or if I watch a movie that moves me deeply,
I trust that feeling when I remember and retell it. I don’t think about plot
devices, character arcs, motifs or any kind of structure beforehand. I firmly
believe that an unbiased perspective and an honest retelling of events allow you
to be sensitive to the impactful stories that arise from day‑to‑day experiences.

The biggest difference between children and adults here is that children can
still feel surprise, which in my opinion is one of the most powerful emotions
for capturing and directing attention. Too many people are too wrapped up in
their mental processes to be surprised by anything anymore.

Great stories are everywhere. Whether they are remembered depends on how you
tell them.

## Author Comments
