---
title: The Wrapper is the Product
published_at: Apr 13, 2025
vignette: endless_thread
snippet:
  AI is powerful, but without good design, it’s stuck in the "command-line" era,
  accessible only to specialists. To achieve mass adoption, we need to focus on
  usability, accessibility, and trustworthiness.
---

## Why AI Adoption Is Stuck

“AI tools go further than ChatGPT or Gemini.” Yeah, no kidding. But for most
people, that sentence might as well be lorem ipsum. The deeper issue is that
while the tools have evolved, the way we present them hasn’t. They’re wrapped in
complexity, built for insiders, and feel like alien artifacts to anyone outside
the dev/design/ops trifecta.

You’ve got people using AI every day without realizing it: auto-tagging in
photos, autocomplete in Gmail. But as soon as you hand them a “real” AI tool,
they bounce. Not because they’re dumb, but because the interface demands they
already speak the language. It’s like handing someone a shell script and
wondering why they don’t use Linux.

Right now, most AI products are stuck in what amounts to the command-line era of
AI. Powerful, yes. But the mental load required to start using them is
non-trivial. You need domain knowledge to get value. Which is fine if your users
are engineers or researchers. But if your goal is mass adoption?

> AI adoption won't come from more powerful models or CEO mandates — it will
> come from thoughtfully designed interfaces that make intelligence accessible
> to everyone.

_— Nan Yu, [“AI adoption is a UX problem”](https://thenanyu.com/ux.html), Apr
2025_

And yet companies keep pushing these tools into orgs, chasing productivity
boosts. Which works, for a while, because the users are specialists or at least
tech-adjacent. But once you hit the edge of that cohort, adoption flatlines. The
tools don’t invite exploration. They gatekeep via jargon, unclear feedback
loops, and zero contextual affordances. This is where the “AI is a UX problem”
take hits hard. We’re not lacking capability. We’re lacking empathy in the
interface. Calling tools like Cursor or Perplexity “wrappers” misses the point:
they reshape the cognitive cost of interaction. They package raw power into
something tractable. Same as how early computers needed punch cards and then
boom: GUI. Mouse. Windows. Mass adoption.

The problem isn’t the model. The problem is you have to understand the model to
use it. The AI itself might be state-of-the-art, but if the product design
treats accessibility as an afterthought, the whole thing collapses outside the
tech echo chamber.

So yeah, AI adoption is stuck, not because it’s not ready, but because it’s
badly dressed. It walks into the room in an obscure academic paper and expects
applause. We need to give it jeans and a t-shirt.

## Why It’s Still a Specialist’s Game

It's not that non-specialists can’t use AI tools; technically, anyone can prompt
ChatGPT or fire up a model. The problem is that outside a narrow domain, they
usually can’t do it well. There’s still an invisible gate around “real” use:
domain knowledge. Even simple interactions require users to internalize
unfamiliar mental models, vocabularies, and workflows. It’s like asking people
to write Bash scripts to check their email. Technically doable. Practically
useless.

This is what people mean when they say we’re still in the “command-line” phase
of AI. Tools exist. They’re powerful. They’re even public. But the interface?
Inscrutable unless you’ve been around the block. The missing layer is usability:
thoughtful design that abstracts complexity without neutering power. There’s a
canyon between the power users and everyone else, and most products are still
shouting across it instead of building a damn bridge.

And look, specialists love this. The market for them is thriving. Enterprise
buyers don’t blink at complexity if it means cutting headcount or boosting
margins. Whole industries are being refactored around AI-powered productivity.
They don’t care if the tool requires a PhD in regex; they’ll train up or hire
consultants. These tools were never meant to be “easy,” just effective for
people already deep in the weeds.

So what you end up with is a bifurcated ecosystem: hyper-niche products built
for the initiated, and mass-market tools that feel like toys because they’re
designed with no real user in mind. Meanwhile, the actual design challenge,
building interfaces that make powerful tools legible to normal humans, gets
sidelined. Not because it’s not important, but because specialists don’t need
it, and they’re the ones writing the checks right now.

This is the gap. This is the opportunity. Tools that nail this layer of
abstraction, like Cursor, Perplexity, or even GitHub Copilot, are winning not bc
their models are better, but because they figured out how to wrap that power in
workflows that make sense. We need more of that. Not more AI. More good design.

## Product Design is Trust and Accessibility

Trust isn’t some abstract, vibes-based UX virtue. It’s the bedrock of adoption.
And in the messy world of AI-driven products, trust has to be earned, not
assumed. You earn it in two ways: by being usable and by being consistent.

Start stupid simple. A legit accessibility effort (actual a11y, yes, but also
just intuitive workflows and low-friction UX) is one of the most powerful trust
levers you have. When users feel seen, like the product understands and
anticipates them, they project reliability onto it. This isn’t just hand-wavy
psychology; this is baked into how people form trust heuristics with software.
Good accessibility is empathy in pixels. And empathy builds loyalty.

But trust also needs resilience. It’s not just “Can I use this?” It’s “Can I
count on this?” AI products fail here constantly, partly because they’re
non-deterministic, but also because their developers treat uptime and
consistency like secondary concerns. It’s not enough to have a model that can
work; the whole experience has to predictably work. If I prompt your product the
same way twice, will I get the same result? Will I get a result at all? If it
fails, will it fail gracefully? Does your interface reassure me that you’ve
thought about the edge cases I haven’t?

Even silly stuff like documentation and backlink hygiene feeds into this. Users
do notice when your support articles look like a content farm. They notice when
half your “blog” is SEO bait. Bad backlinks and sketchy SEO aren’t just
marketing sins. They’re trust-destroyers. They make your product look unserious,
unreliable, or worse, shady. If Google doesn’t trust you, why should a user?

When you design for accessibility and consistency, trust emerges as a side
effect. And that’s what turns an AI tool from a prototype into a product.

## A Product is Still a Product: The MVP Trap

There's this recurring fantasy among early-stage AI builders that if you just
ship an MVP fast enough, success will sort itself out later. Speed is the
religion, and the MVP is its sacrament. But here's the catch: shipping something
isn’t the same as shipping something usable. And when you skip usability in
favor of feature velocity, you’re not iterating, you’re just tripping over your
own feet faster.

> Before you write a single line of code, ask yourself: What problem does my
> product solve?

_— Alyona Potapova, SaaS Product Development: Where to Start and Common
Mistakes, Apr 2025_

An MVP bloated with features but starved of good UX isn’t "lean" or "agile" or
whatever other scrum-adjacent term is in vogue right now. It’s a liability.
Users bounce not because the AI isn't powerful, but because using it feels like
a chore. And once people decide your product is annoying, you're in UX debt
hell; it costs 10 times more to fix that first impression than it would have to
build it right the first time.

The whole point of an MVP is to get real feedback, but bad usability means bad
signal. If people can't even get to the value because the product is janky or
confusing, then what are they even reacting to? Not your idea, not your tech,
just your bad interface. Congrats, you've successfully validated that no one
wants to use your mess.

What’s needed instead is intentional minimalism: solve one real problem,
cleanly. Keep complexity down, not by underbuilding, but by making hard
decisions early. Choose a tech stack that won’t punch you in the face when you
try to scale. Bake in sane design principles from the jump: clarity over
cleverness, trust over tricks.

This isn’t about chasing perfection. It’s about respecting the medium. AI or
not, a product is still a product. People expect software to feel a certain way:
snappy, legible, predictable. Even when it’s doing sorcery under the hood.
Especially then.

## Conclusion

**As we look at the future of AI, it’s clear that success isn’t just about the
raw power of models, but how easily users can interact with them. The right
design can turn an AI tool from a niche product into something that conveys
trust accessible to everyone. To truly reach the masses, AI must learn to speak
the language of design, just like any other disruptive technology before it.**

### References

1. Nan Yu, [“AI adoption is a UX problem”](https://thenanyu.com/ux.html), Apr
   2025
2. Alyona Potapova,
   ["SaaS Product Development: Where to Start and Common Mistakes"](https://instandart.com/blog/bespoke-software-development/saas-product-development-where-to-start-and-common-mistakes/),
   Apr 2025
3. Dr Maria Panagiotidi,
   ["Use of AI In UX: Insights from Recent Research"](https://uxpsychology.substack.com/p/use-of-ai-in-ux-insights-from-recent),
   Mar, 2025
4. Goran Paun,
   ["UX Design for AI Products: Merging Innovation with Usability"](https://artversion.com/blog/ux-design-for-ai-products-merging-innovation-with-usability/),
   May, 2024
5. The Blue Owls,
   ["UX: The missing ingredient to AI Adoption"](https://theblueowls.com/business/ux-the-missing-ingredient-to-ai-adoption/),
   January, 2025
6. Ken Olewiler,
   ["Designing Our Relationship with AI"](https://www.uxmatters.com/mt/archives/2024/04/designing-our-relationship-with-ai.php),
   April, 2024
7. Jakob Nielsen,
   ["Accessibility Has Failed: Try Generative UI = Individualized UX"](https://jakobnielsenphd.substack.com/p/accessibility-generative-ui),
   Feb, 2024

## Author Comments
