---
title: Birth.
period: "1995"
role: Newborn Human
tags:
  - Feeling
  - Moving
  - Thinking
  - Breathing
  - Seeing
  - Hearing
  - Speaking
summary: As far as I can remember, I always wanted to be a creator.
isPrimary: true
---
I was born in Mexico to an engineer and a merchant. I has the privilege of having an interest in computers, the farther you travel back in time, computers become rarer and more expensive. My father shared this privilege by interacting with computers in his youth and a Commodore Amiga was his tool of choice if I'm not mistaken. Mine was a Compaq Presario 5000, the one with the iconic purple wavy aesthetic, dual speakers hanged on each side of the CRT screen monitor, it was "una chulada" like we say here in México. 

To my six-year-old mind, the computer was nothing more than another videogame console, it just ran different games. But before it, there was the Nintendo 64, my first console and a life-defining one for that matter. Io this date my father and I still reminisce on the tough time we had getting the third star in Mario 64's Cool, Cool Mountain; where you have to race the Mother Penguin. Gaming on the computer came shortly after, where the highlights were Civilization III, Age of Empires II, Roller Coaster Tycoon, and of course, RuneScape. Saying that these games were an influence in me would be an understatement, but let's be real, most people born on 1995 share the same feeling.

I remember vividly feeling like the computer, by itself, was a portal to another world. A thought heavily influenced by cartoons and movies, of course. I tried to explore every single crevice of the system. Every weird new file I found got me all excited and a little scared. What will happen if I open this strage thing? Will my computer explode? I hope not, here goes nothing! Most of the time the default window of "what program do you want to open this file with?" opened, and if nothing interesting happened in a few tries, I'd cut my loses and continue exploring.  I can see the way how I approached things as a toddler is directly linked to the essential way that I think now. I firmly believe that this connection must be treasured and conserved as best as possible.

A short time passes, the sixth generation Nintendo console gets released, the beautiful GameCube. I didn't knew it back then, but that console harbors one of my deepest passions, Super Smash Bros Melee, what I consider to be the best work ever done.