---
title: Definity First
period: Dec 2019 - Today
role: Senior Front-End Developer
tags: 
  - SCSS
  - Typescript
  - React
  - Sharepoint
  - Node
summary: The team I'm part of develops Sharepoint sites (confusingly called "Intranets") and custom components for these sites using TypeScript and React.
---
This is a company that sells SaaS, I was hired by the Microsoft Sharepoint team. They taught me everything about Sharepoint from the ground up because I knew nothing back then. My role in the team is to use SCSS, TypeScript, and HTML to build the front-end of new "WebParts" (high-level Sharepoint react components) while another member of the team manages Sharepoint's API in order to manage stored data.

### (Project) Harvard - The Source
Feb 2019 - Sep 2020

This project was one of the most difficult I've had to participate in. I had a minor interest in accessibility before, but during this project, it was almost an obsession. For starters, we had to come to peace with the idea that Sharepoint fails in accessibility and overrides for the native behavior were out of scope. The things that were under our control were still ruled by arbitrary rules and we had to constantly work around them or against them for a proper accessible experience.

Stack on top of that that the designer in charge of the prototype that will be used to test the interface didn't consider lots of states it can be in. The result was a site really difficult to build, and test, that must pass WCAG Level 2 AA. But in the end, we made it and even got recognized by our clients (Harvard) due to the proper delivery of a dire project.

### (Project) Becton Dickinson - Design System
Oct 2020 - Feb 2021

Our client (BD) wanted to move their design and brand guidelines from hundreds of pages in dozens of PDFs to a Sharepoint site. We developed components for the specific purpose to document this kind of information. Afterward, it was a long period of content migration.

### (Project) Wesco - Intranet
Feb 2021 - Ago 2021

Wesco is already a user of Sharepoint, and wanted extra features for a better experience in their portal. This project needed a lot of overriding the native interface, a thing that promotes unexpected behavior and a longer testing period. Is in this kind of scenario where CSS shines with its creative problem-solving potential.

### (Project) Springfield Clinic - Intranet
Ago 2021 - Jan 2022

This project was an override of their portal home site with added components that could feature recognitions, awards, or celebrations and a customized search bar for their numerous departments. 

### (Project) Brii Biosiences - Intranet 2.0
Feb 2022 - Sep 2022

This project changed its site's theme and most of the native SharePoint UI. The design asked for almost purely overrides, which created a long testing process due to specific scenarios coming up in testing.

### (Project) Bridgestone Metalpha - Intranet
Sep 2022 - Feb 2023

Bridgestone, the client, had an existing Sharepoint site where they stored files and employee details. Our task was to enhance this site by incorporating additional components that displayed a greater amount of relevant information to the employees, presented in improved and more effective manners.

### (Project) Wesco - Intranet 2.0
 Mar 2023 - Aug 2023

In this particular project, the primary task involved the modification of Wesco's existing intranet to align it with their updated branding style. Additionally, a small number of web components were integrated to provide useful functionalities for the company's staff members. This initiative aimed to ensure consistency with Wesco's new brand image while enhancing the intranet's practicality for its employees.