---
title: First interest
period: "2005"
role: Kid
tags:
  - HTML
  - CSS
  - VisualBasic
summary: What the hell is a computer program? No, really. What is it?
isPrimary: false
---

I vividly remember asking myself "Wait, what is a program? How can someone
program a program? What is a programming language? How is a programming language
created?" I would probably ask these same questions to my father, and when
answering, he'd point to Jinjer Simon's Excel Programming 2nd Edition. Him,
being a nerdy Gen-Xer, would see VBA on Excel as the programming bastion of
current time. Nevertheless, his guidance left me with more questions and ever
fewer answers.

Let's see, in the first place we have the programs that come out of the box on
the computer, things like MS Paint, Media Player, PowerPoint, MSN; even
Solitaire came to mind. To me, all of these were developed by actual wizards
inside a building owned by Microsoft, so let's skip them for now. In the second
place we have computer programs you had to buy from the store, usually a CD that
you'd bring home to manually install it. This included most of the PC games I
played back then, Age of Empires 2, Civilization III, StarCraft, Rollercoaster
Tycoon, and boxes of _who-knows-what_ racked up on the store. These computer
programs were also developed by actual wizards, but in some other building, not
one owned by Microsoft. Then, on third place, there were websites. What the hell
are these? How is it even possible to use this programs without installing them
inside the computer? Why can I only open them on the Internet Explorer?
Everything was getting more and more confusing. Now there's a fourth type of
programs? Ones that run inside Excel? Ok ok, lets give it a shot. So I open the
book, and felt like if I was being spoken to in another language. But I
understood something very clearly, even by mastering this book I wouldn't be
able to create any other program I've known before. I quickly found out that
things like MS Paint, Age of Empires, or any website I've known couldn't be
developed using the content of that book. So then, why does it exist? Why does
my father speak so highly of it? I just didn't knew what I didn't knew.

In the midst of this _existential crisis_, a little site you might remember came
out and became a little popular. What was it? MyPlace? MySpell? Something like
that. I remember my profile page felt like a unique personal site. Everyone had
one and all of them where different from each other. It was the beginning of a
trend of maximizing the customizability of personal websites. You want a
tile-repeating gif of a black skeleton dancing with flames on the back as a page
background? You got it. What's that? The default black-text is not legible on
top of that background? Who cares man, you got a cool skeleton. Wait, what did
you say? It's 2009 already? A new profile-page-customizable social website is on
the rise? Count me in, what's the name? What do you mean "Tumbler" without an
"e"?

This changed everything. After a couple of years of using MySpace, HTML code
looked less and less spooky. It was put to the test when some other kid in my
class asked me to edit their profile page and I said yes in exchange for a few
bucks. Just like that, my career as a developer was born.
