---
title: J... ja... java?
period: "2011"
role: High Schooler
tags:
  - Java
  - SQL
summary: You're telling me RuneScape was built with this? Haha, nice one. Wait...
isPrimary: false
---

Ahh high school, the era where modern human beings bloom into their youth. It is
a time for experimentation, for understanding the emotions caused by our first
important chemical shift. You know what, let's teach this kids Java. If you're
one of my less-tech-savvy classmates back then, you'd be used to easy computer
classes. Most of it would've been completely dedicated to learning one of the
Microsoft Office's tools. From their perspective, the most difficult task in
computer class would be doing _something_ in Excel. It was tricky at most, but
doable nevertheless. I hardly remember seeing anyone having trouble or failing
that class. Now, the very next semester, the class would be diametrically
different to anything anyone in my class had every seen.

"Hello students, for our first class I'm going to need everyone to open
Netbeans." You want us to open _whatbeans_? What are you talking about? What do
you mean`System.out.print`? I'm not even connected to a printer. Wait one
second, did you say this is Java? Like the same Java that asks for my permission
when I open RuneScape on the browser? There is no way that could be the case.

Ok, I'll bare with you; let's see where this class is going. The days go by and
we get taught operations, conditionals, loops, variables, and functions. Was it
interesting? Sure, but it still didn't explain how can RuneScape be built using
these. How do you program a bank? What about animations? Still, the basics kept
me hooked. At the end of the semester I was ready for more, but it was the only
programming class in the curriculum. The teacher invited the class to an
extracurricular course after-hours for college students. I get there expecting
to see more Java or similar. Wait, what do you mean we won't be using Netbeans?
Huh? SQL? It feels like you're just mixing random letters now. I attended the
course, kept quiet, and listened to what the teacher had to say. "No way, this
is just Excel with extra steps." Why aren't these people simply opening excel,
it's much easier than installing and setting up a database server then manually
creating a table with code written in all caps. Screw it let's build a Pokédex
with this thing.
