---
title: On Notes - pt. 2
published_at: 2023-09-03
snippet: The features, the out-of-scopers, and the maybes of Remember Land, my new note-taking app.
---
## On notes pt 2
My rejection of document-based note-taking was left clear in part one. This note scheme has been part of my life since forever. It would be unrealistic on my part to assume a smooth transition from one mode to another. Now that I’m on the verge of releasing version 0.1.0, what do I predict to miss from taking notes in documents?
### Arbitrary font styles
There will be an urge to customize the style of just a single note or word. Say, changing it’s color, size, weight, emphasis, etc. This is definitely out of scope for the first major version.

To move around the notes (say, with a drag and drop system) to change their order or to add titles that divide arbitrary sections from each other. This is an extremely low-priority feature that may be included in the first major version of the app. The proposed design works with saved search queries that have their own page. This page might be customizable enough for these use cases.

Styles that are not arbitrarily set, like the color theme and font family, will be configurable as a feature soon enough. It must be developed after the configuration page.
### Print to paper
This is an interesting idea that I personally like a lot. I totally see myself wanting to print the results of a search query or a particular page. This is a feature that I’m enthusiastic to develop because it is solved using CSS. I doubt that colored printing will be available from the start because I really don’t care about it. Printing on paper is a low priority but is likely to come in the first major version or on a close minor update after it.
### Adding images or other content
This has been a big no-no for me since the beginning. Using a third-party media host service is out of the question and I consider implementing a self-hosted solution a gimmick feature. The mid-term solution is that the user hosts their content somewhere else that can share media through URLs (like Google Drive, Dropbox, etc.) and add it as an Entry Mark.

This will automatically tag the entry as a “link” and become an interactive anchor. Something mid-priority is regarding link previews, this will be implemented in the first major version but may be limited to certain services like YouTube at the beginning.
### Sharing and collaboration
Simultaneous collaboration is out of scope from the first major versions because multiple-user authentication is as well. Link sharing is fairly likely using search query pages. The user will be able to mark search queries as public, this means that that particular page will not require login to access, and therefore the URL can be publicly shared. As a note, this feature requires good metadata usage for social media post previews.
## Next updates
That is enough talk about the things that are out of scope, low priority, or far from being released. Now I would like to talk about the things that I’m excited to develop and release soon.
### Full mobile support and smooth interactivity
I was so excited about the desktop keyboard-focused interactivity that completely ignored mobile interactions and functionalities. To remedy this, I’ll develop a mobile-only low-key menu that will be on top of the keyboard or at the bottom of the page. The actions in this menu can help a user navigate the entry input and entry query islands. Additionally, the user could interact with notes using the same menu.

This also deserves a light side quest to fix a series of issues with [Lunchbox](https://github.com/CarcajadaArtificial/lunchbox) and [GarliCSS](https://github.com/CarcajadaArtificial/garlicss). This will include updates in components and responsiveness fixes. After these few urgent updates, mobile should now be fully featured.
### Tag Pages
There must be a page that manages tags. Here, there are a few features that can be useful: merging one tag to another, changing the name of a tag, and visualizing the data of every tag. Really, merging tags is simply renaming a tag to an existing one's name. All of these tools will be inside `routes/tag/index.tsx`. 

Additionally, tags will also have individual pages of their own in `/routes/tag/[tag].tsx`. This page will contain a predetermined layout that aids in easily navigating the entries with that tag. In the Entry Query and Entry Input islands, there's a need for a better tag selection. There's a need for autocomplete or some way of finding the correct tag to use.
### Threads
It is useful to group entries in threads, there must be a way to create threaded notes. This would be really useful for grouping notes together and giving them a common source. When creating a new entry, a checkbox could offer the required interaction. When checked, the next entries would form a thread one connected to the other. Entries might have different tags or marks. There must also be a way to add a new entry to a thread or to connect an existing one using its id or something.

Notes can only be inside one thread. Adding a new entry to a thread will always add it to the end of the thread. Removing an entry from a thread must not affect the rest.
### Time views
This will be amazing to navigate different time periods. To make it work the following route structure must be implemented: `/routes/archive/[year]/[month]/[day]` and `/routes/archive.tsx` will be moved to `/routes/archive/index.tsx`. This allows to query every single date with a predefined layout in each.

The yearly view will focus on permanent notes and on the popularity of every tag. The monthly view will focus on tasks and events that happened that month. Finally, the daily view will display all entries of that day in an organized way.
## Final thoughts
So the future looks bright, right? Yes. Right. I'm super pumped for these features. I love to just dump my mind in posts like these. I feel like the path forward is somewhat blurry but visible, and that must be something good.